Modul B.Inf.1247 - Version 1
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen
Modul B.Inf.1247: Introduction to Information Retrieval and Natural
Language Processing
English title: Introduction to Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing6 C
4 SWS
Lernziele/Kompetenzen:
After successfully completing the course, students should be able to:
•Summarize major IR and NLP applications
•Explain important IR and NLP algorithms and data structures
•Determine the conceptual requirements of specific IR and NLP problems
•Compare the suitability of algorithms and data structures for specific tasks
•Devise solutions for complex IR and NLP tasks by implementing and adapting
suitable algorithms and data structures
•Evaluate IR and NLP methods and systems quantitatively and qualitativelyArbeitsaufwand:
Präsenzzeit:
56 Stunden
Selbststudium:
124 Stunden
Lehrveranstaltung: Lecture Introduction to Information Retrieval and Natural
Language Processing  (Vorlesung)
Inhalte:
The lecture will cover the following topics:
•Basics: Background, Text Preprocessing, Documents, Terms, Vocabulary, Inverted
Index
•Boolean Retrieval, Positional Retrieval, Tolerant Retrieval
•Efficient Index Construction, Index Compression
•Term Weighting, Relevance Scoring, Ranked Retrieval
•Semantic Text Analysis, Link Analysis
•Complete Retrieval Systems
•Results Visualization and Exploration
•Evaluation of Retrieval Systems
Please visit www.gipplab.org/teaching for details on this course.2 SWS
Prüfung: Written test (90 min.) or oral exam (approx. 20 min.)
Prüfungsvorleistungen:
Successful completion of the examination in the practical course component of this
module.
Prüfungsanforderungen:
•Knowledge of major IR and NLP applications
•Ability to explain important IR and NLP algorithms and data structures
•Ability to analyze the conceptual requirements of specific IR and NLP problems
•Ability to compare the suitability of algorithms and data structures for specific tasks
•Ability to evaluate IR and NLP methods and systems quantitatively and
qualitatively2 C
Lehrveranstaltung: Practical Course Introduction to Information Retrieval and
Natural Language Processing  (Laborpraktikum)
Inhalte:2 SWS
Amtliche Mitteilungen II der Georg-August-Universität Göttingen vom 11.10.2022/Nr. 9 V7-WiSe22/23 Seite 10996Modul B.Inf.1247 - Version 1
In the practical course, students work on applied research projects (teamwork is
possible) that address complex information retrieval tasks. Using the programming
language Python and presenting the intermediate and final results of the projects is
mandatory.
Please visit www.gipplab.org/teaching for details on this course.
Prüfung: Präsentation (ca. 20 Minuten)
Prüfungsvorleistungen:
Successful completion of an applied research project including at least one intermediate
milestone or presentation.
Prüfungsanforderungen:
•Ability to analyze the conceptual requirements of specific IR and NLP problems
•Ability to compare the suitability of algorithms and data structures for specific tasks
•Ability to determine the conceptual requirements of specific IR and NLP problems
•Ability to devise solutions for complex IR and NLP tasks by implementing and
adapting suitable algorithms
•Ability to evaluate IR and NLP methods and systems quantitatively and
qualitatively4 C
Zugangsvoraussetzungen:
keineEmpfohlene Vorkenntnisse:
Knowledge of at least one object-oriented
programming language, preferably Python, is
required to complete the course. Python is used as
part of the exercise sessions. For participants who
are unfamiliar with Python, a fast-paced introduction
into the essentials of the language will be provided.
Sprache:
EnglischModulverantwortliche[r]:
Prof. Dr. Bela Gipp
Angebotshäufigkeit:
irregularDauer:
1 Semester
Wiederholbarkeit:
zweimaligEmpfohlenes Fachsemester:
Maximale Studierendenzahl:
30
Bemerkungen:
This course provides a good foundation for a bachelor's or master's thesis in our
group. Visit www.gipplab.org/students-corner/graduation-projects for our current theses proposals.
Amtliche Mitteilungen II der Georg-August-Universität Göttingen vom 11.10.2022/Nr. 9 V7-WiSe22/23 Seite 10997